Australian standards
for editing practice
Second edition

Institute of Professional Editors Limited

First published 2001 by Council of Australian Societies of Editors (CASE)
© Council of Australian Societies of Editors 2001

Foreword

Second edition published 2013 by
Institute of Professional Editors Limited (IPEd)
© Institute of Professional Editors Limited 2013
Design and layout by Graham Abraham Design
Printed in Australia by Eureka Printing Pty Ltd
The Standards are available from the organisations below.
Institute of Professional Editors Limited (IPEd)
PO Box 6585, Point Cook Vic 3030
iped-editors.org
IPEd member societies
Canberra Society of Editors Inc., PO Box 3222, Manuka ACT 2603
editorscanberra.org
Editors Victoria, PO Box 176, Carlton South Vic 3053
editorsvictoria.org
Society of Editors (New South Wales) Inc., PO Box 254, Broadway NSW 2007
editorsnsw.com
Society of Editors (Queensland) Inc., PO Box 1524, Toowong Qld 4066
editorsqld.com
Society of Editors (South Australia) Inc., PO Box 2328, Kent Town SA 5071
editors-sa.org.au
Society of Editors (Tasmania) Inc., PO Box 4512, Bathurst St PO,
Hobart Tas 7000
tas-editors.org.au
Society of Editors (Western Australia) Inc., PO Box 99, Subiaco WA 6904
editorswa.com

Never have able wordsmiths – the minders, or keepers, of language – been more
needed. Communication has become more abundant, more widespread, faster
and more deeply ingrained in our lives. Access to an array of media is wider than
it has ever been, and ideas and language innovations are burgeoning. Sometimes,
though, ideas are marred by the speed and ease in which they can be delivered,
leading to miscommunication, a lack of clarity and a lack of elegance.
Editors are correspondingly more indispensable. Working within this realm,
they need solid grounding, logical thinking and a breadth of understanding of
how published language and communication work. And they need a functional
grasp of an increasing range of subject areas.
This second edition of Australian standards for editing practice, published
by the Institute of Professional Editors Limited (IPEd), the peak body for
Australian editors and societies of editors, gives a solid frame to the range of
knowledge and skills that competent editors possess. It includes the understanding
of new technology and the flexibility to embrace new media, new rules and new
language, among the many other factors that enhance clear communication.
IPEd has done a fine job in reviewing the original edition to produce a timely and
well-crafted document to guide new and experienced editors, their educators and
their clients. This book brings together a special wisdom and care for our language
– especially as it is used in Australia – combined with experience of working with
Australian English in the professional domain. Our language has moved on since
the first edition. We need a reference work that is up to date.
As with the first edition, published in 2001, the second results from the
teamwork of many Australian editors, to whom their colleagues are deeply
indebted. Capably led by Kerry Davies AE, editors from all of IPEd’s member
societies worked for more than a year to revise, review and refine the Standards.
Others contributed to meetings and discussions about the revision in their
local societies. These editors generously gave time and effort to the project;
they brought their intelligence and negotiating skills to the task. Writers and
readers, and the editors whose work benefits both those groups, are in their debt.
Emeritus Professor Roland Sussex OAM
Patron, Institute of Professional Editors Limited
February 2013

Contents

Preface

vi

The fundamentals of editing

viii

The role of editors

ix

A. Professional practice

1

A1

Professional knowledge and conduct

1

A2

Communication

2

A3

The publishing process

3

A4

Legal and ethical matters

4

A5

Design, typography and formatting

5

A6

Tools and software for editing practice

6

A7

Printing and replication processes

7

B. Management and liaison

8

B1

Project definition

8

B2

Project documentation

9

B3

Monitoring

10

C. Substance and structure

11

C1

Appraisal

11

C2

Structural devices

12

D. Language and illustrations

13

D1

Clarity

13

D2

Voice and tone

14

D3

Grammar and usage

14

D4

Spelling and punctuation

15

D5

Specialised material

15

D6

Illustrations

16

E. Completeness and consistency

17

E1

Integrity

17

E2

Textual elements

18

E3

Illustrations

19

E4

Format, layout and production

19

Glossary

20

Revision history

24

Acknowledgements

24

Preface

Australian standards for editing practice sets out the core standards that
professional editors should meet and tells employers what to expect
from the editors they hire. It shows new editors the range of skills and
knowledge they should aspire to. It helps the Institute of Professional
Editors (IPEd), educational institutions and other training providers
to devise material, seminars and courses on editing. And it is the
foundation for IPEd’s national accreditation of editors.
Australian standards for editing practice does not attempt to capture
the full array of knowledge, skills, best practice, sequential tasks and
responsibilities required by all editors on all projects in all settings.
However, professional editors should meet certain core standards.
The term ‘standard’ is used here to mean ‘anything taken by general
consent as a basis of comparison; an approved model’ (Macquarie
dictionary). Australian standards for editing practice does not attempt
to codify the quality of editors’ work – how well a particular task has
been performed. Rather, it aims to set out the knowledge and skills
needed for editing practice, those that experienced editors routinely
use in their work.

vi

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

The standards in this document are divided into five parts:
A.

Professional practice

B.

Management and liaison

C.

Substance and structure

D. Language and illustrations
E.

Completeness and consistency.

The standards set out in Part A underpin those in Parts B to E.
Editors who meet the standards given in this document are able to
do a professional job with a minimum of supervision.
This document is genre neutral; that is, it describes the knowledge
and skills required of editors regardless of the type of material they
work on or the organisational context they work in.
Australian standards for editing practice recognises the most recent
version of the Style manual for authors, editors and printers as the
standard Australian editorial reference.

Preface

vii

The fundamentals of editing

The role of editors

Editing involves carefully reviewing material before it is published,
and suggesting or making changes to correct and improve it.

Editors are central to any publishing project; they endeavour to
reconcile the needs of the author, the audience and the publisher.

Three aspects, or levels, of editing are generally recognised –
substantive editing, copyediting and proofreading.

Editors are part of a team that guides a work through its various
stages from creation to publication. All editors need to have a broad
understanding of the publishing process and their role within it,
regardless of the extent of their involvement. They should demonstrate
initiative and flexibility, adapting to the needs of a project and the
specific work environment. They need to communicate clearly and
tactfully, and to respect the opinions of others.

•

Substantive editing (including, and sometimes called, structural
editing) is assessing and shaping material to improve its
organisation and content. It is editing to clarify meaning,
improve flow and smooth language.

•

Copyediting is editing to ensure consistency, accuracy and
completeness.

•

Proofreading is examining material after layout to correct errors
in textual and visual elements.

In practice, not all editors work on all of these aspects, and not all
publications go through them all. Further, some overlap is inevitable.
The exact editorial process followed for a given publication varies,
depending on factors such as the quality of the original material, the
intended audience and purpose, set practices within an organisation,
production methods and tools, schedule and budget.
Australian standards for editing practice emphasises the place of editors’
work in the context of the entire publishing process. The practice of
editing is not confined to working with specific written materials in
isolation. For example, an editor’s capabilities may extend to project
management, using the same skill set needed in managing any job and
dealing with the other people involved. Although editors generally do
not need the design and layout abilities of a desktop publisher, they
need to understand what a desktop publisher can do.

viii

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

Editors work with many different subjects and many types of
publication (novels, reports, websites, magazines, textbooks and
scientific materials, to name a few) that require specialised knowledge
and skills. Editors also work in many different contexts, from book
editing for traditional publishing houses to advising on communication
strategies in government and corporate sectors. Some editors perform
tasks that extend beyond editing, such as project management, design,
indexing and website maintenance.
The goal of editors, regardless of their role or the type of publication,
is to ensure that the material is consistent and correct, and that its
content, language, style and layout suit its purpose and meet the
needs of its audience.

The role of editors

ix

A. Professional practice
Editors are part of a larger publishing process; they understand
the stages of that process and the standard practices of the
publishing industry, whether for printed or onscreen publications.

A1 Professional knowledge and conduct
Regardless of their role in the publishing process or the
organisational context, editors need to understand the following:
A1.1

Steps in the publishing process, the relationship between them
and their effect on the final publication.
Includes publication planning, budgeting, editing, designing, formatting
or typesetting, proofreading, navigation, indexing, print production
(such as production checking, binding and distribution), online
procedures (such as programming, testing, site maintenance and
uploading or replication) and marketing.

A1.2

Different types of publication, their purpose and audience,
and the editing and production choices that these imply.
Includes implications for accessibility, cost, scheduling, production,
marketing and delivery modes.

A1.3

Components of a publication appropriate to the delivery
medium, which may include preliminary matter, body,
and end matter.

A1.4

The need to balance time, cost and quality to suit the purpose
of a publication, and the effect of choices in any of these on
the final product.

A1.5

Professional ethics.
Includes objectivity, confidentiality, conflict of interest and implications
for editing academic material such as theses. (When editing a thesis,
comply with the IPEd ‘Guidelines for editing research theses’, available
at iped-editors.org.)
A. Professional practice

1

A1.6

Standard business practices in the publishing and
communication industries, whether as a freelancer or as
an in-house editor responsible for contracting work.
Includes knowledge of acceptable rates and methods of quoting; types of
contracts and conditions; and the different types of insurance that may
be required (such as public liability and professional indemnity) and
the circumstances under which insurance may or may not be necessary.

A1.7

A2.5

A client, whether an individual, a group of individuals or an
organisation, is the entity to which an editor is answerable for
a publishing project. The client may or may not be the author.

A2.6

The need for ongoing professional development.
Before undertaking a project, editors should ensure that they have
the skills, training and experience necessary to complete the work.
They should also recognise when they need to acquire and apply
specialised knowledge from other sources or professions. Editors should
improve and upgrade their knowledge and skills throughout their careers.

A2 Communication
Competent editors have the required skills to communicate
clearly and diplomatically with clients and colleagues. They
understand and can apply the following:

Respective roles of editor, author and client in decision making.

Negotiation techniques to apply when differences of opinion
occur, and understanding of when to bring in an appropriate
arbiter.

A3 The publishing process
Regardless of the extent of their involvement in the publishing
process, editors require understanding of the following:
A3.1

Scope of the briefing process for the publishing team.
Expertise required of the publishing team may include project
management, editing, design, illustration, photography, electronic
publishing, word processing, typesetting, proofreading, indexing,
prepress, printing, web maintenance and marketing.

A3.2

Technology used in the industry and the terminology that
describes it.

A3.3

Role of the editor in a publishing project, and the importance
of properly defined responsibilities, accountabilities and
authorities.

A2.1

Principles of clear writing.

A2.2

Principles of structuring material for printed and onscreen
publications.

A2.3

Principles of accessibility – the ways in which people access
and absorb information.

A3.4

Includes access for people with disability; links between design and
substance; media, formats and typography; and legibility and readability.

Levels of editorial intervention required for various
publications.

A3.5

Stages of the editing and proofreading process, including
which stages need to be repeated to ensure consistency.

A2.4

2

Conventions of spelling, punctuation, grammar and usage in
Australia, and evolving trends in language usage nationally
and internationally.

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

A. Professional practice

3

A4 Legal and ethical matters

A5 Design, typography and formatting

The publisher is responsible for ensuring that a publication
meets all legal requirements, but the editor should alert the
publisher at the earliest opportunity to any possible legal
problems. In particular, editors require knowledge of the
following:

Editors understand the following design, typography and
formatting concepts, and recognise when professional design
input is appropriate:

A4.1

Legal and ethical dimensions of the publishing process, and
their implications for a publication.
Includes libel, defamation, obscenity, discriminatory language, cultural
sensitivity, intellectual property, plagiarism, moral rights and copyright,
privacy and confidentiality, visibility of material, the ease with which
material can be copied and republished in other formats, and different
copyright protections available in Australia and other countries.

A4.2

A5.1

For example, use of fonts, layout and colour.

A5.2

When legal advice on implications for publishing should
be sought.

The information that is required to appear in a publication.
May include the publisher’s name and address, acknowledgements, credits
and copyright notices.

A4.4

Legal deposit requirements and registration practices.
Includes cataloguing-in-publication (CIP) data, international standard
book number (ISBN) and international standard serial number (ISSN).

A4.5

Permissions required for reproduction, and the procedures
and responsibilities for obtaining permission.

A4.6

When it is appropriate to remove, amend or flag potentially
biased, non-inclusive or offensive material.

4

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

Effect of typography and layout on readability in different
media. Typographical characteristics include:
• alignment
• use of appropriate typefaces for different purposes (for
example, printed and onscreen publications)
• use of white space and margins
• use and effect of kerning
• fonts, text size, leading and weight
• capitalisation
• line and column widths
• colour (for example, visibility for people who perceive
colour differently).

Includes legislation relating to copyright and digital rights; trade practices
and trademarks; privacy and freedom of information; social justice, access
and equity; sub judice matters; and parliamentary privilege.

A4.3

Use of design elements to convey meaning and enhance
readability.

A5.3

Requirements associated with illustrations (see D6 for a full
definition) in different media.
Includes techniques for best fit in the space available and correct
placement in the final publication.

A. Professional practice

5

A6 Tools and software for editing practice

A7 Printing and replication processes

Editors use resources to help ensure consistency and to
communicate suggested changes to the client. Editors
should be up to date and proficient in the following:

Different publishing processes bring different kinds of problems.
The more editors know about the following processes, the
better they will be able to make informed choices at all stages
of a project:

A6.1

Common word-processing software for editing.
Includes use and development of templates, styles, revision mark-up
(comments, track changes), tables of contents, footnotes and endnotes,
macros, find and replace functions, and spellcheck.

A6.2

A6.3

Includes colour systems, paper sizes, screen resolutions and file sizes.

A7.2

Prepress, print production and proof-checking processes.

Includes backing up, virus scanning, transmitting and receiving files,
converting and saving files, archiving and version control (incorporating
date and time, stage of editing and editor identification).

A7.3

Characteristics of different types of printing, embellishment,
paper and binding styles.

A7.4

Production requirements for dissemination of onscreen
publications.

A7.5

Accessibility of printed and onscreen material for all users,
including people with disability.

A7.6

Procedures for website and document maintenance.

Principles and requirements of software for design, formatting,
web authoring (including mark-up languages), content
management and citation management, and the interaction
of word-processing software with these programs.

Accuracy in content transfer.
Includes identifying typical errors that may arise with scanned material,
text derived from voice-recognition software, material transferred from
word-processing software to formatting software and material copied
from websites into word-processing software.

A6.5

Technical requirements associated with different production
methods.

Accepted techniques for handling electronic files.

Includes different document and graphic file formats and their use in
the publishing process.

A6.4

A7.1

Includes backing up, archiving, handling responses, updating and
authorisation procedures.

Style guides or style manuals appropriate to the genre.
IPEd recognises the Style manual for authors, editors and
printers (most recent edition) as the standard Australian
editorial reference.
Also includes the use of dictionaries, thesauruses and specialist references.

A6.6

6

Standard mark-up symbols and conventions for copyediting
and proofreading.

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

A. Professional practice

7

B. Management and liaison
Editors can be expected to undertake a range of tasks, from
managing the entire publishing process to performing one very
specific part of it. Regardless of the size of a publication or
the extent of their role, all editors need to manage their own
time and resources. They also need good communication skills,
initiative, tact, perseverance, flexibility and respect for others’
points of view. This section describes what editors must know
and be able to do to define, document and monitor a project.

B1.6

Final output required from available resources.

B1.7

Review and approval processes.

B2 Project documentation
Tasks required to complete project documentation include
preparation of the following:
B2.1

• work required and those who are to accomplish the
various tasks
• guidelines for writing, editing and design
• equipment and facilities required
• detailed, realistic timetable
• budget and payment schedule
• approval processes
• document-management system.

B1 Project definition
To maintain a schedule, and to negotiate and keep track of
changes, project managers must establish the following aspects
of a project:
B1.1

Project purpose, audience and delivery mode.

B1.2

Definition of client and lines of authority.

B1.3

Components of the publication.

B1.4

Specification of quality required, and the resources needed
to achieve such quality.
Includes the range of publishing skills and services, time, budget,
materials, equipment and facilities.

B1.5

Publishing team members, and definition of their
responsibility, accountability and authority.

Project plan, identifying:

A document-management system controls drafts, file naming, tracking
and marking up changes, backing up files, and archiving text and
original illustrations.

B2.2

Designer brief.
Includes sample setting, sample content, text elements and estimated
length of a publication.

B2.3

Content outline.
Includes a table of contents or a high-level summary (printed material);
flow charts, storyboards or site maps (onscreen material).

May include people responsible for project management, editing,
design, illustration, photography, electronic publishing, web design,
web maintenance, typesetting or compositing, proofreading,
indexing, prepress, printing, publicity and marketing.

8 Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

B. Management and liaison

9

B2.4

Formal agreements that detail, at least:
• responsibility, accountability and authority of each party
• services and final output required
• schedule for receipt of material and handover of
completed work
• methods of communication
• process for agreeing on variations
• remuneration.

B3 Monitoring
Organisation and communication in the publishing process are
essential. Editors must track and record the following:
B3.1
B3.2

B3.3
B3.4

The project’s progress against budget, schedule, scope of work
and required quality.
Communication with client and team members to ensure
that the team meets deadlines, contains costs and prevents
problems.
Version control of successive drafts and proofs, including
sources of change.
Formal project closure and evaluation of the extent to which
the project achieved its objectives.

C. Substance and structure
Editors can be expected to ensure that the form, arrangement,
focus and length of a publication are suitable for its purpose,
taking into consideration the intended audience, author’s
intention, available resources, medium of publication and
level of editorial intervention required.

C1 Appraisal
Editors exercise their judgement in determining whether
basic structures are in place, the sequence of ideas is logical
and material with potential to be used for multiple formats
has been identified. In particular, editors are required to
evaluate the following:
C1.1

Suitability and quality of the original material.
May include printed and onscreen text, media assets such as video and
audio files, and interactive activities such as quizzes.

C1.2

Length, structure and focus appropriate for the purpose of
the publication, intended audience and medium.

C1.3

Textual devices for people to find their way around a publication.
May include a table of contents, cross-references and index.

C1.4

Content from the publication with potential to be used for
other purposes, such as promotion and marketing.
For example, an editor may be required to draft a blurb or select text for
use in promotional material.

C1.5

Additional material to enhance a publication in multiple
formats.
For example, the e-book version of a publication may benefit from
additional content such as author interview, animated diagrams,
interactive quizzes, video tutorials or games.

10

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

C. Substance and structure

11

C2 Structural devices

D. Language and illustrations

Editors ensure that publications are effective and suitable for the
intended audience by identifying the quality required and using
various techniques to achieve the following:

Editors ensure that the elements of a publication are suitable
for its purpose, taking into consideration the intended audience,
author’s intention, available resources and type of publication.
This section describes what an editor must know and do to
ensure that the language and illustrations of a publication
are appropriate for its purpose.

C2.1

A complete, coherent and balanced publication, restructuring,
rewording, adding and deleting material where necessary.

C2.2

Appropriate form of presentation, rewriting or reformatting
material where necessary.
For example, material in tabular form may be better presented as part of
the text; dialogue as narrative text; number-laden text as a chart or table;
a descriptive passage as a diagram; or a lengthy digression as dialogue or
an appendix. Paragraphing, emphasis, lists and illustrations may also
help to clarify the material.

C2.3
C2.4

Cohesive and varied paragraphs and sentences, reordering
where necessary.

A major purpose of editing is to make the mechanics of
presentation inconspicuous so as not to distract the reader.
The principal areas dealt with by the editor to ensure clarity
are the following:
D1.1

Relevant, logically graded and consistent headings and other
labelling devices appropriate to the publication and medium,
and accurately reflecting the content to which they apply.
Includes menus, buttons, electronic links, margin notes, headers
and footers.

C2.5

Ease of navigation, using cross-references or electronic links
to guide readers through a publication.

C2.6

Effective use of supplementary material, requesting or creating
new material if required.
Includes maps, tables, figures, glossary, index and further reading list.

C2.7

D1 Clarity

Principles of clear expression.
For example, the use of plain English to avoid ambiguity, verbosity
and needless repetition; replacing the general and abstract with the
specific and concrete; replacing noun strings; and eliminating clichés
and euphemisms.

D1.2

Clear and logical connections between phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs and sections.
For example, editors use subordinate structures for subordinate ideas,
replace negative constructions with affirmative ones, and employ parallel
grammatical structures to create smooth links.

D1.3

Punctuation to ensure clarity of meaning and ease of reading.

Appropriate referencing.
Includes citations, bibliography, list of references, endnotes, footnotes,
margin notes, cross-references, glossary and index.

C2.8

Effective summaries for meaning, adding lists, abstracts and
metadata to help readers understand a publication’s content.
Metadata includes title, description and keywords associated with a file.

12

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

D. Language and illustrations

13

D2 Voice and tone

D4 Spelling and punctuation

In improving a sentence, paragraph or passage, editors change
only what is necessary to establish and preserve consistency
in the following:

English spelling and punctuation vary in different regions of
the world. Editors are required to know the following:

D2.1

D2.2

Reading level, degree of formality (register) and use of
terminology appropriate to the type of publication and
audience.

D4.1

Australian spelling and punctuation, and acceptable options
in both, in texts for Australian publication.

D4.2

Word usage, spelling and punctuation used in other
English-speaking cultures as appropriate.

Voice (or voices), colour and tone.
Refers to the level and style of language appropriate to the nature
of the material and its audience; alternatively, especially in fiction,
the representation of characters through the style of language
ascribed to them.

D3 Grammar and usage
Editors do not introduce new errors and do not alter the
intended meaning. To ensure consistency, accuracy and
completeness, editors are required to know the following:
D3.1

Conventions of English grammar and syntax in different
genres.

D3.2

Words and their meanings.

D3.3

Conventions governing:
• expression of numbers, dates, percentages, measurements
and statistical data
• use of italics, capitalisation, bolding, underscoring, angle
brackets, hyphenation, symbols and shortened forms
• list formatting
• citation of sources and quoted material in academic and
non-academic text.

D5 Specialised material
Punctuation, spelling and word choices in specialised material
must be defensible and coherent. Editors working with such
material require relevant knowledge and skill in the following:
D5.1

Includes fiction, poetry, music, drama, academic writing, government
reports, web content, mathematics and scientific notation.

D5.2

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

The extent to which an academic thesis may be edited and
the nature of the edit.
Refer to the ‘Guidelines for editing research theses’ at iped-editors.org.

D5.3

Technical and specialised terms, with the ability to explain
them for the intended audience.

D5.4

Conventions for expressing foreign and historical currencies
and units of measurement, and methods of conversion.

D5.5

Diacritics for foreign words, and other letter conventions.
Includes symbols added to letters, such as the various types of accent, and
ligatures or tied letters.

D5.6
14

Forms and protocols associated with the language and display
of specialised material.

Techniques available to help potential readers to find web
content, such as search engine optimisation (SEO).
D. Language and illustrations

15

D6 Illustrations

E. Completeness and consistency

‘Illustrations’ is used in the widest sense to include all nontext elements, such as drawings, cartoons, diagrams, charts,
graphs, maps, photographs, computer-generated graphics,
slideshows and multimedia files. Editors require knowledge
of the following:

Editors ensure that elements of a publication are complete,
consistent and correctly placed. They also test onscreen
publications for usability and functionality.

D6.1

Principles of presenting information in visual form.

D6.2

Styles of illustration appropriate to a publication.

D6.3

Need for additional illustrations.

D6.4

Most effective positioning of illustrations.

D6.5

Requirement for captions and acknowledgements.

D6.6

Different types of graphs and charts, and their uses.

D6.7

Conventions governing the use of graphs, including correct use
of their various elements, such as axes, scales and labels.

D6.8

Conventions governing the use of the various types of maps
and their elements, such as labels, boundaries, contours, scale,
legend and orientation.

D6.9

Principles of clear, logical and effective structure and layout
of the parts of a table.

E1 Integrity
To ensure that a publication is complete and consistent, editors
are required to check:
E1.1

Completeness of the various components of a publication,
ensuring that they are accurate and in proper sequence.

E1.2

Accuracy of cross-references, citations and links:
• within the text
• between the text and illustrations and tables
• between the contents page and the headings, text and
page numbers
• between the lists of illustrations and tables in the
preliminary matter and the illustrations and tables.

E1.3

• navigation, including structure, links and menus
• usability of all interactive elements
• compliance with accessibility standards.

D6.10 Technical quality of illustrations.
Includes resolution, clarity, file size and tonal contrast.

D6.11 Accessibility requirements for onscreen materials.
For example, all images, other than purely decorative ones, require
alternative text (alt text), which identifies the content of an image.

16

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

Usability of onscreen materials, by testing:

E1.4

Functionality of online publications, by testing for:
• performance, download time and interactivity (aspects
designed to elicit responses)
• functionality using different platforms and browsers.

E. Completeness and consistency

17

E2 Textual elements
To ensure the consistency of the language and internal structures
of the text, editors check them against external and internal style
references. Editors use the following tools, methods and elements
to maintain consistency, accuracy and completeness:
E2.1

An editing style sheet specific to the publication to ensure a
consistent approach to textual elements such as:
• spelling, grammar, punctuation, capitalisation, hyphenation,
abbreviations and italics
• style of numbers, dates, percentages, symbols and equations
• structure, grammar and punctuation of lists, including
nested lists
• heading hierarchy
• chronology, descriptions, names and terms
• alphabetical and numerical sequences.

		
Alphabetical sequences apply to bibliographies, glossaries and indexes;
numerical sequences apply to chapters, paragraphs, sections, pages,
footnotes, illustrations and tables.

E2.2

Explanations of symbols, terms and shortened forms, when
required and placed appropriately.

E2.3

Lists that help readers find information efficiently.

E2.6

Preparation of copy for preliminary material, headers or
footers, covers and spine, if required.

E2.7

Assessment of index for length, content and accuracy, and
conformity to style.

E3 Illustrations
Editors need to understand what can and cannot be done with
illustrations. At a minimum, editors ensure that a publication
presents:
E3.1

Includes captions, labels and legends; for onscreen materials, also includes
the content of link titles and alt text.

E3.2

Identification and review of statements where content seems to
require checking.

E2.5

Referencing that is consistent, accurate and complete.
Includes acknowledgements, citations, bibliography, list of references,
endnotes, footnotes, margin notes, cross-references, URLs (website
addresses), glossary and index.

18

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

Consistency between text and non-text elements.

E4 Format, layout and production
Editors should be familiar with proofreading strategies to
check the following elements of a publication:
E4.1

Format and layout against design specifications.
Includes type sizes and styles, line lengths, alignment, leading, heading
hierarchy, weights of rules and other design features.

Includes lists of contents, abbreviations, illustrations, tables, crossreferences, dramatis personae and links in onscreen publications.

E2.4

Illustrations, where required, that are consistent, accurate,
complete and relevant.

E4.2

Layout to correct problems, including widows and orphans;
rivers of space; awkward breaks in words, lines, tables and lists;
and incorrect placement of design features and illustrations.

E4.3

Page numbers and headers or footers.

E4.4

Page and production proofs and binding.

E. Completeness and consistency

19

Glossary

end matter: Material that follows the last page of the body; may include
glossary, appendixes, acknowledgements, reference list and index.

accessibility: Ease of information retrieval (A1.2, A2.3, A7.5, C1.3, D5.6,
D6.11, E1.3, E2.3). 1. Technological access, as through a network or the
internet. 2. Cognitive access, such that information is easily read. 3. Ease of
access for people with disability. See also functionality, usability.

format: 1. Shape and size of a book (A5). 2. Particular way information is
coded for computers (A6.3, A6.4). 3. Particular design elements, list styles
(def. 1) and type styles (def. 3) used in a publication (A1.1, A2.3, A5,
A6.4, C2.2, E4). 4. Medium of publication (A4.1, A5, C1.5).

alt text: Alternative text that identifies the content of an image (other than
purely decorative images) used in onscreen materials to ensure accessibility
(def. 3) (D6.11, E3.1).

front matter: See preliminary matter.

back matter: See end matter.
body: Material that follows the preliminary matter and precedes the end
matter, which may be organised into parts, chapters, sections and subsections;
may include tables and illustrations, captions, labels and notes.
cataloguing-in-publication (CIP) data: Part of an international system
of cataloguing publications (A4.4).
citation: Method of properly accrediting sources, often through an accepted
academic method using footnotes or endnotes and a reference list.
copyediting: Editing to ensure consistency, accuracy and
completeness; also called line editing. See also verification editing.
copyright: Legal concept giving the creator or commissioner of an original
work exclusive rights to it.
credit: Acknowledgement of a source, as an in-text reference, as part of a
caption or in a list in preliminary matter or end matter.
defamation: Written or spoken statement that damages a person’s or an
organisation’s reputation (A4.1). See also libel.

functionality: Performance efficiency of an online publication, and its
reliability on different platforms and browsers (E1.4). See also accessibility,
usability.
imprint page: Page within preliminary matter that gives details of the
publication and the publisher.
inclusive language: Language free of bias.
intellectual property: Original material produced by a writer or other creator
that is protected by copyright law (A4.1).
international standard book number (ISBN): Part of a worldwide system
of cataloguing books.
international standard serial number (ISSN): Part of a worldwide system
of cataloguing journals and other series of publications.
legal deposit: Legal requirement to lodge works that are catalogued with
an ISBN or ISSN in national and state libraries.
libel: Statement that damages a person’s or an organisation’s reputation
(A4.1). See also defamation.
line editing: See copyediting.

diacritic: A symbol added to a letter in a foreign word, such as the various
types of accent, which affects its pronunciation.

macro: A computer program that can be used to automate procedures
in applications such as word-processing software (A6.1).

dramatis personae: List of main characters in a dramatic work.

metadata: Information describing the content of an item such as an
electronic file; may include title, description and keywords (C2.8).

electronic: See online, onscreen.

20

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

moral right: Right of creators of works that are protected by copyright
law (A4.1).

Glossary

21

online: Any material that is accessed through a website.
onscreen: Any material that appears on a computer screen or other
electronic device.
parallel structure: Consistent use of a grammatical form for equal clauses
within a sentence or for items in a list.
plagiarism: Appropriation or close imitation of other people’s writing or
ideas without acknowledgement (A4.1).
preliminary matter: Material that precedes the first page of the body,
which, for printed publications, may include title page, imprint page,
dedication, foreword, contents, lists of illustrations and abbreviations,
preface, acknowledgements, abstract and summary; commonly known
as the ‘prelims’. For onscreen materials, entry sequence may include
splash screen and home page.

2. The nature and tone of written materials; see also voice (D2.2).
3. Type formats (size, font and so on) and spacing for elements of a
publication that are applied consistently through a style template or design
brief (A6.1, E2.7, E4.1).
style guide: A handbook, usually developed by an organisation for general
in-house use or for a particular series of publications, detailing points of
editorial style (def. 1).
style manual: A published work developed for general use by authors,
editors and printers, detailing points of editorial style (def. 1).
style sheet: A list, usually alphabetical, developed by an editor during
the course of an edit, detailing points of editorial style (def. 1) for a
particular publication or series.

proof checking: Checking of various types of proof during the printing
process.

substantive editing: Editing to assess and shape material to improve its
organisation and content, to clarify meaning, improve flow and smooth
language, ensuring that language use is appropriate to the nature of the
material and its audience; includes structural editing.

proofreading: Examination of material after layout to correct errors in
textual and visual elements. See also verification editing.

textual device: Device for adding emphasis to a piece of writing, including
formatting, punctuation, sentence structure and the arrangement of words.

reference: See citation.

usability: The ease with which a publication, especially a website, can be
navigated and used by its audience (E1.3, E2.3). See also accessibility,
functionality.

sample setting: Material selected as representative of the elements of a
publication, such as levels of heading, list formats (def. 3), boxed text and
other design elements, and headers and footers, as part of the design brief.
slander: See libel.
source: See citation.
structural editing: An aspect of substantive editing that focuses on the
organisation of material and the types of elements included to clarify
meaning and improve flow.
style: 1. Decisions made about punctuation, capitalisation, spelling,
formatting of lists and tables, presentation of numbers, abbreviations
and so on that are applied consistently throughout a document or series,
usually through a style sheet, style guide or style manual (A6.5, E2.1, E2.7).

22

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

verification editing: Checking that material is consistent, accurate and
complete; may include elements of proofreading and copyediting.
version control: A system of file-management conventions used to record
different versions of a document.
voice: 1. The level and style (def. 2) of language appropriate to the nature
of the material and its audience (D2.2). 2. The representation of characters,
especially in fiction, through the style (def. 2) of language ascribed to
them (D2.2).

Glossary

23

Revision history

CASE Standards Working Group,
1998–2001*

Standards Revision Working Group,
2010–2011

The first edition of Australian standards for editing practice was devised by
the Standards Working Group of the Council of Australian Societies of
Editors (CASE), approved by the members of all Australian societies of
editors and ratified by CASE in 2001.

Kathie Stove DE ELS, convenor
(South Australia)

Edwin Briggs AE, convenor
(Canberra)

Catherine Gray, secretary
(New South Wales)

Hilary Cadman AE ELS (Canberra)

CASE was an informal national body that brought together the seven
Australian societies of editors to work on projects of common interest.
The successor to CASE, the Institute of Professional Editors Limited (IPEd),
a not-for-profit company, was established in 2008 as the peak national body
for Australian editors.

Catherine Bruce (Tasmania)

This revised edition is the result of the efforts of three working groups, the
first in 2005–2006. The 2010–2011 working group, comprising members
of the Canberra Society of Editors, consulted with members of the other
Australian societies of editors through IPEd Council and the committees
of IPEd’s member societies.
In 2011, IPEd appointed a facilitator to consult with all Australian societies
of editors, through their committees and a series of workshops, in a process
similar to that used for the preparation of the original edition of the
Standards. After the workshops, each society appointed a coordinator;
together the coordinators and facilitator devised the final revision through
national teleconferences and consultation with their workshop participants.
The resulting document was submitted to IPEd Council and approved
by the members of all Australian societies of editors in August 2012.

Acknowledgements

Elizabeth Manning Murphy DE
(Canberra)

Amanda Curtin AE (Western
Australia)

Kerie Newell (Canberra)

Janet Mackenzie DE (Victoria)

Standards Revision Working Group,
2011–2012

Rhana Pike (New South Wales)
Loma Snooks DE (Canberra)
Janette Whelan DE and Mary-Jane
Bosch (Queensland)

Kerry Davies AE, facilitator
(Queensland)
Robin Bennett AE (Queensland)
Kerry Coyle AE (Western Australia)

Standards Revision Working
Group, 2005–2006*
Shelley Kenigsberg, convenor
(New South Wales)
Helen Bethune Moore (Victoria)
Robyn Colman (Tasmania)
Elizabeth Manning Murphy DE
(Canberra)
Sharon Nevile (Queensland)

Loene Doube AE (South Australia)
Rosemary Luke AE (Chair, IPEd
Council)
Cathy Nicoll AE (Canberra)
Rosemary Noble AE (Victoria)
Pam Peters DE and Denise Holden AE
(New South Wales)
Elizabeth Spiegel AE (Tasmania)

Helen Topor (Canberra)

The standards working groups, from inception to this 2011–2012 review,
acknowledge the assistance of the Editors’ Association of Canada (EAC),
whose published Standards have guided both the process and the output.
The 2011–2012 working group especially acknowledges that it has drawn
heavily on the preface and introduction to the 2009 edition of EAC’s
Professional editorial standards.

24

Australian standards for editing practice, second edition

* The postnominals DE (distinguished editor) and AE (accredited editor) were instituted
by IPEd in 2008. They have been included with the names of members of earlier working
groups. The postnominal ELS (Editor in the Life Sciences) is awarded by the Board of Editors
in the Life Sciences (BELS), an international organisation established in 1991.

Acknowledgements

25

